What is Self-Realization? A Full Explanation and Walkthrough

Audio Transcript of Video Featured on Jamie’s Channel on YouTube

Self-realization is the insight into the subjective experience of “who am I” that results in the sudden
conclusion of self-image or ego, which are the thoughts we identify with as “who we think we are”.
The result of self-realization is an ongoing feeling of peace, the end of compulsively thinking about
yourself, and what is described in Buddhism, Hinduism, or Zen as “the end of suffering”, suffering in
this context referring to the negative emotional experience in response to our own beliefs about
ourselves being damaged, rather than the experience of an event itself. For example, getting rejected
by someone you have a crush on might be a bit a letdown, similar to a small bruise, but the ongoing
feeling of shame, anxiety, comparison, anger or loss as a result of thinking of yourself as incompetent,
unattractive, or that she was into you is referred to as suffering.
While this is not often believed to be the case, Self-realization is not gradual or something you learn, it
is a sudden phenomenon like turning a light switch from on to off. It is typically brought about
through the result of a meditative practice, enquiry into “who am I?”, temporarily induced through
psychedelics as part of a process referred to as “ego-death” or suddenly realized as a result of analysis
into the creation of our self-image in the first place – which is the self-knowledge we collect and
identify with over our lifetime. The resulting non-egoic state is likened to the “natural state” as it is
essentially what we already are and have been our whole life, but for lack of a better word, forgot, as
it’s bandaged over by beliefs about who we are that we’ve never actually questioned or understood.
While Buddhist, Hindu, Zen, or spiritual communities get a bit lost in their own sauce by describing self
realization as “leaving the stream”, “enlightenment”, “waking up” or “living without time”, that is
mostly just slam poetry, and I think it really misleads people to imagining that either it’s all complete
nonsense, or that there is some ethereal psychedelic trance like state you can permanently achieve by
living in the mountaintops with your legs crossed, sipping fluoride free water, activating your 7 infinity
chakras, and meditating to the Last Airbender. You don’t have “stages of spiritual growth” as anime or
a YouTube search will lead you to think, that’s all religious or spiritual belief, beliefs being exactly what
ego or self-image is itself composed of and is what self-enquiry is examining. Self realization results in
the permanent end of your own cognitive neuroticism which derives from the deeply held beliefs you
have about who you are, your past, and your future. It is not some kind of religious, drug, or spiritual
experience. It is not permanent ecstasy or watching your life play out like a movie. It is a purely secular,
physiological phenomenon that has for thousands of years become mythologized and turned into
religion or westernized and turned into sexy exercises and mental bodybuilding with cool outfits and
Whitelaw.
In my opinion a more practical and plain English description that helps people understand the scope
of self-realization is as an insight into the nature of your own self-identity that results in the complete
conclusion of all psychological insecurity, which includes things like regret, anxiety, despair,
hopelessness, anger at other people’s opinions, hatred, envy, jealousy, lust, greed, ambition,
perfectionism, attachment, pity, disappointment, pride, comparison, and any emotional state that
comes paired with thinking about yourself, including nightmares and the emotional relationship to
dreams. The key point being that this is a complete uprooting, never to return, opposed to our
conventional efforts to only reduce our psychological insecurity through gradual self-improvement,

achievement, conforming to our self-image, following a life philosophy, controlling people’s
behaviours, a routine lifestyle, therapy, coaching, drugs, being liked by others, trying to find unique
characteristics in ourself, self-comparison, partner dependency, rationalization, justification,
distraction, blame, and emotional avoidance or overcoming. Any psychological security we might
achieve through those means also being impermanent and constantly threatened to be torn down by
real events like a break-up, passing of a loved one, losing our job or social status, getting old, or even
simply being offended, insulted, or rejected by someone.
This phenomenon is the same thing that people like J Krishnamurti tried to communicate
intellectually, it is was what Ramana Maharshi tried to communicate as a form of consciousness based
monism, it was what Zen tried to teach for centuries with silence, which is to point out that
knowledge creates misunderstanding of yourself, not understanding; it was what George Gurdjieff
tried to teach by ramming an enormous wedge between your biggest insecurities and your immediate
perception of what is happening to try to get you to see that the schism between what you believe
and what you perceive are the cause of all internal conflict, cool moustache too; and it was what
various religious figures tried to point out dramatically before someone at ancient BuzzFeed said “got
it, top ten commandments you won’t believe number 7”; it was what the Tao Te Ching says over and
over again on every page, and it is what talk therapy accidentally begins to probe the surface of,

which is forcing us to communicate our beliefs about ourselves in order to bring errors in our self-
understanding to our own awareness, which fixes the error the moment it is recognized, and then the

intentional part which is the enormous corpus of psychological knowledge will try to help us address
the emotional and behavioural consequences of how we psychologically experience our life.
The reason this topic is so hard to communicate and is now just associated with religion or smoking
weed and playing bongos, is because it’s actually not knowledge, but because the only tool we
generally believe exists for understanding something is accumulating and refining our knowledge and
then thinking about it with that knowledge we’ve turned it into a bunch of superstitions and activities
by the broad cultural belief that it is something you learn, like getting a spiritual PhD or the
consequence of gradual improvement like mental bodybuilding. It is not something you learn and get
better at it; it is something you realize. Like if you were scrambling to pack up your camping gear for a
trip you forgot about, and when your friend pulls up, they say “what are you doing? We’re staying at a
hotel” and you’d be like “oooooh, I didn’t realize”. That is what a realization is. What you thought was

the case was not the case and now your mood and behaviour instantly change in response. Self-
realization is not a philosophy or a new belief, it’s an out of left field, completely secular psychological

phenomenon that occurs in relationship to a realization about who you actually are that you had
misunderstood up until that point, like having a sort of permanent post nut clarity if the person you
were sleeping with was yourself. Which to be fair, is probably the case anyway.
The root of self-enquiry is that as far back as we can remember we are concerned with problems that
affect what we call “me”. Our entire lives we endeavour to resolve, avoid, overcome, blame or
rationalize the problems that are experienced by “me”. We invent philosophies, rules, behaviours,
and coping mechanisms to deal with our own psychological distress whether we’ve been afflicted by
something as simple as getting our feelings hurt by someone’s insult, all the way to the goals we have
in our life and how we cope with serious trauma or death. Self-enquiry is the examination not of our
problems, which is always our usual focus, but what exactly is the entity that we call “me” that we
have identified with our entire life, that is affected by our problems?

I think it’s important to get a definition across, because when anyone who thoughtfully talks about
this stuff refers to self-image or ego, it refers to the entirety of our own self-knowledge. There is a
vocabulary problem that exists because the translations of old Buddhist, Zen, or Hindu descriptions
use English loan words from historical western psychology that don’t really apply. Self realization is
described as the ending of self-image or ego in western language, and your “mind” in historical
eastern language, but nowadays because everyone immediately thinks of Freud, Jung or their
favourite politician when you say ego, insecure people on social media when you say “self-image” or
your whole brain when you say mind, a more modern definition of what is being described is just
“who you think you are” psychologically. Self-realization is the conclusion of self-knowledge. It
doesn’t conclude because you force it to stop, it concludes because it realizes the answer. When you
say “I’m thinking about myself” it is absolutely all the thoughts in that structure that is being referred

to. If you are thinking about you, your past, your future, or your life, that is your self-image. Your self-
image means exactly that, your self as you imagine it.

I think a good way to introduce the concept is with what are called Koans in Zen, because even though
they’re kinda goofy, we’re all familiar with them in more ways than one. A Zen cliché we’ve all heard
is the question “what is the sound of one hand clapping?” and while that’s what Chris Rock should
have called his last stand up tour, what most people don’t know is the purpose of Zen Koans in the
first place, which is to ask an unanswerable question so the questioned person can see the endless
cycle of thought and emotions that they themselves generate from their pursuit to find an answer. In
essence, it’s a prank. It is sending your kids into the hardware store to pick up some blinker fluid. In
the zen context, that final arrival at complete futility, that moment of mental silence when you stop
searching entirely and say “wait a minute, you can’t clap with one hand”, that’s the point. Your own
thinking created a problem where no problem existed, that you then form beliefs around and become
emotionally involved with. To be fair, this was of course many years before rap videos discovered that
you can in fact clap with no hands, but that’s another topic. Koans in general are usually comical or
very simple in nature, but in a bit of a twist, self-realization is not the Koan, your self-image is. A
common cliché a lot of people repeat is “self-realization is realizing there is no self to realize” which
they then misinterpret as a sign that says, “you don’t need to explore this cave, there’s nothing in it”,
but it is actually a sign that says “you are exploring a cave with nothing in it, come out of the cave”.
Our self-image, which is our effort to figure out who we are in the conventional way of gradually
accumulating life experience and refining our knowledge of ourselves is the Koan. Who you actually
have always been exists underneath, unencumbered and not at all discontent or insecure, but is
masked by the effort to rationalize and figure yourself and your life out using your knowledge.
To try to summarize the whole concept, who we think we are is the identifications we have with our
own self-image. At our absolute core, every one of us walks around every day believing our whole
lives that who we are is an imagined object call “me”. We think about ourselves endlessly and cannot
evaluate our lives without doing so. What you call “me” are objects of thought in your imagination
that you identify with and mistakenly believe are you. Intelligent, unintelligent, attractive, ugly,
successful, unsuccessful, right, wrong, funny, unfunny, cool, uncool, good, bad, old, young, republican,
democrat, black, white, Christian, Hindu. These are all categorizations of knowledge we look at and
say, “yeah that’s me”. The most prominent of which being “my past, my future, and ‘who I think I
am’”. This is what self-realization as a phenomenon is contingent upon. We genuinely believe, not
that our imagination of ourselves is accurate or inaccurate, but that our imagination of ourselves is in

fact symbolizing something that is actually us. Self-realization is seeing that there is absolutely no
connection at all, and that it is not possible to think about yourself because it’s like trying to taste
your own tongue. Absolutely everything that you think you are is wrong, because the instrument you

are using, which is self-knowledge, is itself the error, and cannot ever make contact with itself. Self-
knowledge is an oxymoron because all knowledge must be a symbol of something that is not itself. It

is like asking a hologram to show you what it really looks like when it is not taking on the appearance
of something else. This realization causes a permanent conclusion to self-knowledge and thinking
about yourself because it is seen to not just have no purpose, it has always been impossible. I’m not
saying that if you’re black, just kidding you’re actually Michael Jackson, I am talking about a much
more primordial and serious question of what your actual existence as a living organism
fundamentally is, and what our whole lives we have truly been trying to answer when we say “I’m
thinking about myself”, which is impossible, and must be rephrased as “Who or what am I?” in order
to permanently resolve the question and the insecurity it itself creates.

And so, let’s start with that, who do we think we are. Fundamentally, who we think we are is our self-
image, our self as we imagine it, which is a collection of thoughts that we identify with and use to

describe ourselves. For example, when I say, “who is Jimmy?” my brain collects information and facts
about my friend Jimmy and stores them as a particular bundle of knowledge so I can recognize,
describe, and interact with him. This makes perfect sense because I’m not Jimmy, I don’t have his
memories, so I have to create an image of what goes on in his life through his communication and my
external observations of him. Similarly, we have the same structure in our brain for what we call
“me”. There is a central thought called “me” and then a bunch of thoughts connected to that which
we call our self-image, ego, or self-knowledge. Things like how smart am I, how attractive am I, how
successful am I, how likeable am I, how good or bad I think my childhood was, what race am I, what
religion am I, What political ideals I have, who I want to be in the future, what are my strengths and
weaknesses, my big 5 or hexaco personality type, my star sign, my archetypal identifications, what
type of people I dislike, what type of people I like, how I should behave etc. And the incessant activity
of this thought structure means that you’re constantly thinking whenever you’re not engaged in an
activity or concentrating because your self-image is constantly receiving new data from interacting
with you and trying to update itself. We are always taking in new information, rehashing it, and trying
to constantly improve upon, deny, conform to or change our self-knowledge because we believe by
accurately assessing who we are it allows us to act more effectively in the world in relationship to
others and navigate from our past to our future.
We experience emotional hurt and distress from other people’s opinions and our own thoughts about
ourselves because our thoughts can literally change who we think we are. If I think I am an introvert,
and someone says “god, introverts are so awkward and cold. Cringe.” I will experience an emotional
and intellectual response because I believe that this person is talking about me. If I think I am an
introvert and this person’s assessment of me is wrong, I get angry because I think I am an introvert
and they’re totally wrong about me. If I admire this person and think they might be right, I might get
hurt because I think I am an introvert, that is an undesirable thing to be, and I will try to change
myself in the future so other people won’t dislike me. In reality, I’m not an introvert - an introvert is
an abstraction of me. I am the fact of whatever I am, and an introvert is a symbol used to try to
describe me. I then recognize myself in the symbol, like a mirror, and mistakenly think that the symbol
is me, so I can then be hurt if someone attacks the symbol. This phenomenon of mistaking ourselves

for an abstraction and then being hurt or frightened by threats to that abstraction is the basis of the
identity we have created in our minds called “me”.
If you read a horoscope, and it says “Scorpio, you must acknowledge that you are a big nerd” we
might say “hey, I’m not a big nerd” and it’s like bro, you’re not a Scorpio. This is obvious to anyone
who doesn’t believe in astrology, and is observably true because you are not a scorpion, but when the
identifications relate to your particular beliefs about yourself, you automatically have a psychological
response. If you think you’re pretty smart, then take an IQ test, and it says “please pay 15 dollars for
full results” and then when you do that it says “lol, reddit moment” you might feel like you’re a bit of
a dumbass, but why does this bother us? Our intelligence has not changed because someone has
insulted us, what has been attacked is our belief that we are intelligent, which is our self-image. These
are softball examples, but imagine how quickly your attitude to life would change if you lived your
whole life, got to the age of 80, said “peace out bitches” and died. Then instantly you woke up in a
completely different reality, someone took off your headset, and they said, “that’ll be $70”. You’d be
sitting there thinking “holy shit... Fucking inflation dude”.
Self realization has nothing to do with creating a new philosophy or belief, it is entirely the
examination of what we currently do believe about ourselves, and the subsequent realization is that
trying to think about yourself is like walking through a hall of mirrors. Not a single reflection is
actually accurate, which is not that hard to understand, but the crux is realizing that even if you think
you’ve averaged them all out and have a pretty good sense of what you actually look like, that entity
you are looking at is not you, that is your reflection, but you still are fearful of the mirror being
shattered because you believe it represents a past or future event. Self-realization is not a new belief
that replaces your old beliefs like philosophy, religion, or self-improvement, all the beliefs about
yourself just end, they themselves are errors that are hurting you and causing insecurity.
When someone says, “They hurt my feelings” what that means is “They’ve damaged my beliefs about
myself”, and because we believe we are our beliefs about ourself, we genuinely have an emotional
response to being insulted because we think who we actually are is being attacked. At a basic level,
this is observably false because if someone calls you ugly it does not change your physical appearance.
If someone calls you dumb it does not change your intelligence, if someone says, “nice kids shoes,
loser” when you’re wearing your favourite light up shoes, you’re probably thinking “they can’t be kids
shoes, I’m 37”.
It is important to observe that this process is automatic. You cannot simply come up with a new
philosophy or life motto like writing positive affirmations on your mirror or saying, “it’s only a loss
when you sell” and have it do much of anything. That’s just thoughts and prayers. As long as this
structural belief system that is your self-image continues to operate in your brain because you believe
it to be yourself, you cannot stop reacting to your own thoughts about who you are, your past, your
future, what you think of other people, and what others think of you, you can only change your
reactions and coping mechanisms, or at best change your physical behaviour, have multiple positive
experiences in a specific scenario, and then your brain will reduce the neurotic emotion you have in
that particular circumstance in the future, which we broadly call “self-improvement”, which is really
just changing your beliefs about yourself to match your new capacities. In contrast, Self realization is
the actual end of this automatic process. It is not a manual concentrative intervention like
mindfulness, “watching your thoughts like clouds” or “put your attention on the negative emotion

and realize it’s just a sensation”, it is actually seeing that the automatic process is caused by believing
who you are is your self-image, and the moment you examine what that structure is down to its roots
and realize it was always just a symbol you recognize yourself in, like a reflection, and you then
identify what is actually being reflected in the first place, the process ends automatically and the
neuroticism stops arising. It is not reassuring yourself your imagination isn’t real, it is that you don’t
get your feelings hurt or become angered by the other person’s comment in the first place. It is not
that you are extremely anxious to go to go on a date, but then you remind yourself that girls are like
spiders and are just afraid of you as you are of them and then you’re like “wait, no not like that”, it’s
that the social anxiety completely stops arising. You don’t need to rationalize or fight something that
isn’t there in the first place.
One of the big hints that perhaps our current self-understanding is irrational is that we form images of
ourselves the same way we form images of another person, despite having access to our own
memories already. It makes sense that I need to create an image in my own mind of who my friend
Jimmy is, because I am not him. I take my own memories, recombine them with what we call human
intelligence, and use my own thinking to construct an abstraction of Jimmy’s experiences that lives in
my own brain. If I could access Jimmy’s memory directly, this step would obviously be unnecessary, so
the question is why do I create an image I call “Me” when I already have my own memories? Clearly, I
wouldn’t need to speculate about Jimmy’s life if I had immediate access to all of his memories and
experiences, so why do I have to try to imagine myself when I already have my own memories and
experiences? One answer would be “I need to know what other people think of me”, but that doesn’t
make any sense because what other people think of you is in your image of them, not your image of
yourself. You don’t actually know what other people think, you can only speculate based on their
communication and behaviour. The answer to the question “why do I have to create an image of
myself when I have my own memories?” is actually really simple: you don’t. It is redundant. You are
always exactly who you are in your entirety every moment you are alive; you don’t ever need to think
about yourself unless you’re trying to communicate your experience to another person. That is
physiologically why this phenomenon actually exists. It is not a religious or spiritual belief. It is not
mental bodybuilding or more knowledge. It is realizing your brain is running two clients called “me”
that you have always mistaken for one. If you can discern clearly, exactly who “me” actually is, the
unnecessary mini client closes itself and reallocates those resources, because it is a derivative of the
other that is caused by mistaking yourself for an imagined other person called “me”.
What is obviously the case for each of us, but largely ignored, is that every single one of us spends our
entire lives acting out a desire to manage our psychological self-evaluation, which is our self-image,
because our psychological self-evaluation is our mood. It is what we think of ourselves and our
circumstances, and one of our deeply held beliefs, like solving our own hunger, is that our emotions
are something that has resolution in external objects. It appears this way to us because it’s partially
true, but not for the reason we think it is. If you are hungry, and you eat something, you will not be
hungry anymore, that is a real, physical reaction. Similarly, but not at all the same, if you are lonely
because you don’t have a partner, and then you get a great boyfriend or girlfriend, you will no longer
feel lonely. If you are bored and feeling stuck, and then you get an opportunity to go on a great
adventure, you will not feel bored and stuck anymore. This is why pretty much every single person, all
the time, their whole life, seeks resolution to their emotional problems by finding solutions to their

problems in the external world, or if they can’t do anything about them, coping with their problems or
trying to rationalize them.
What we don’t ever recognize is that if you are lonely, and get a great partner, your loneliness goes
away. But why? There are two beliefs most of us have: one is that you are enjoying the joy and sexual
attraction from meeting your partner and that has somehow cancelled out the negative emotions, but
that is a positive experience in reaction to this new circumstance, which is its own, standalone thing.
Your emotions don’t “cancel each other out” they are sensations in your body that indicate something
like a dashboard in a car. The other belief, which is much more important, is that we think our
loneliness went away because it appears to us that loneliness is the feeling of isolation of not having
an intimate partner or close friends, but if you look really closely, it’s not the fact that you are isolated
that causes loneliness, it is the desire for meaningful companionship that is itself loneliness. Your
loneliness comes to an end not because you have a cool girlfriend, but because your individual desire
for companionship is no longer operating. It is not that social anxiety is causing me to be frightened of
talking to people, it is my belief that there is a risk in socialization that is itself social anxiety. It is not
that my despair makes me feel like my life is meaningless, it is the belief that my life is meaningless
that is itself despair. It is not my ambition that is causing me to be self-critical, is it my belief that my
current state of being is insufficient that is itself ambition. It is not that I am angry because I was
wronged, it is the belief I was wronged that is itself anger. It is not even that my hopelessness is
caused by someone close to me dying, it is my belief that my life is irreversibly in disrepair that is itself
hopelessness. The emotion does not cause the belief and the belief does not cause the emotion, they
are both the same thing, they are not separate. Take the classic cliche “guys want to solve the
problem; girls want to feel understood” which is two sides of exactly the same coin. It does not matter
which side you naturally lean towards or what gender you are, they are the same. If you want to solve
the problem, it is because you see a problem as something to overcome, if you want to rationalize
your emotional state, it is because you see the problem as something to diminish. They both work as a
means of addressing our emotion, but they are both only partial, because they are both
misunderstandings of the underlying phenomenon causing our suffering, which is our beliefs about an
external object that we genuinely perceive as the root of the problem. If we have a terrible day at
work, we all say “damn, my boss was a complete ass to me today” and squarely put the blame on our
boss, an external object. Your hypothetical girlfriend might say “well, what did you do that caused
him to act that way?” which is trying to get you to improve yourself in order to overcome the
problem, while I might say “ugh, I just feel only a real dick would be so mean about how I schedule my
day if I still get my work done” which is trying to diminish the problem by rationalizing my behaviour

and devaluing his criticism, and then your hypothetical girlfriend would point out that you’re self-
employed and I’d be like “why are you never on my side”.

What this means is that in our lives, we conventionally believe that contentment and peace of mind
lies in solving our problems, but contentment and peace of mind actually arises from creating a
circumstance under which we no longer perceive there is a problem. As an extreme example, when
you are dreaming, you do not have the same problems as when you are awake. Only when you wake
up and think “oh yeah, I forgot that I’m not in university and didn’t study for my finals, and forgot to
wear pants for some reason, and my teeth are starting to fall out as I’m trying to run away from a
tsunami but I just don’t have any strength in my legs” that was just a dream. Anyway, enough of those
stupid problems I thought were real over the last several hours, back to my real problems. You didn’t

solve any of your waking problems by falling asleep, and you didn’t solve any of your dreaming
problems by waking up, in both cases you just stopped perceiving that there was a problem.
This isn’t to say your unpaid bills are just your imagination, it means that in simple terms, it is correct
that food will solve your hunger. It is correct that a great partner can solve your loneliness. It is correct
a lack of food will cause hunger. It is not correct that a lack of a partner will cause loneliness. In a
similar way a craving is not a lack of food like hunger, it is a desire for specific food. Loneliness is not
lack of companionship; it is desire for meaningful companionship, whether it be a romantic partner or
certain peers.
The point that can then be addressed is that it’s not the fact that is important, it is our beliefs about
the fact that is the cause of our psychological insecurity. If our beliefs can shape our entire
psychological experience, can our beliefs be examined directly, instead of trying to always meet or
rationalize their demands? I want to point out here that what I’m describing is not the effort to ignore
our problems by changing our beliefs. That’s like saying “I just like, don’t give a fuck bro” when you
do, in fact, give a fuck. It is not ignoring your bills because they stress you out, it is inquiring into what
our beliefs are about our problems in order to see very clearly what they are. You are not looking for
an outcome, you’re looking for understanding. If you believe there are monsters in your closet, your
neurotic problem solving will tell you to sleep with a baseball bat under your mattress. Conventionally
we believe the solution to this problem is checking if there are monsters in the closet, and if that is
available it is very easy, albeit unnecessary, but what if you have a fear of losing someone? or going to
hell? Or that you are a loser who is never going to get a cute gf? Or that you can’t go back in time and
buy bitcoin at $200 dollars? It is also possible to end your fear of monsters being in the closet by
realizing that monsters don’t exist, so they can’t be in the closet. Checkmate gay monsters.
A good example of this is humility. Humility is the absence of vanity, which is the desire to be admired
and praised by others and an aversion to criticism; however, most of us think humility is a behaviour,
because we see competent individuals display an aversion to the spotlight, they then get praised for
their humility, and we think “I like people who are humble, I want to be like that” But the desire to be
humble is itself vanity. Bragging is a form of vanity, but so is downplaying your achievements in order
to appear humble. Dressing up to be the centre of attention is vain, but dressing down to pretend not
to care is also vain. Thing is, even choosing to dress in the middle to avoid standing out and being
judged is also vain. This is hard to understand at first because we naturally think “That doesn’t make
any sense Jamie you said everything I could do is vain”, but that is exactly what I’m saying, vanity is
not a behaviour, it is a psychological insecurity. It is a desire for praise and a fear of criticism, which is
a form of suffering. Not only is it impossible to discern if someone is actually vain or not if they are
subtle enough in their behaviour, there is also absolutely no behaviour or philosophy you can adopt to
“become more humble”. You can choose to act in a certain way that other people call humble, but
that is deception for the sake of vanity. Humility only exists when vanity completely comes to an end,
in which case everything that you do, no matter what anyone else calls it, is humble, because there is
no psychological desire for praise, and no psychological aversion to criticism. You are welcome to
either and do not mind, as your sole concern is for if your actions have hurt or helped others. When
you see that it’s not other people’s opinion of you that is causing you suffering, it is actually your own
vanity that is itself suffering, it is obvious that it is something we no longer want to experience, but
the only way we conventionally know how to address our vanity is through conforming to it. By
improving our own skills or behaviour, we can act in a way to more often experience praise from

others, alternatively, we can cope with our vanity, by avoiding situations where others will criticize us.
This behaviour of conforming to or coping with our psychological insecurities is fundamentally
adhering to our self-image, and what everyone does in their lives in order to feel content. We attempt
to build a world of security through overcoming our perceived deficiencies and avoiding things that
make us insecure that we can’t control or easily influence.
What we don’t realize is that vanity for example, can completely end, but not through achieving
praise or avoiding criticism, which is trying to solve the problems vanity poses to us, but through
ending the creation of the problem in the first place, which means probing the beliefs we have that
causes vanity to arise. You can modify your behaviour to be treated a certain way by others, which
will improve your mood, but that is no different than thinking the solution to anxiety is about 3 vodka
cranberries. You are not resolving the problem; you are treating the problem. Only if you see the error
in vanity itself can you instantly and permanently change yourself psychologically through realizing
the inaccuracy of your own beliefs, and with the realization of our error, our behaviour automatically
changes. For example, if you’re a kid who really, really believes in Santa, you are going to be
concerned that Santa is omnipotently watching you and judging your behaviour, which causes you
immense stress and psychological suffering trying to never make a mistake so Santa doesn’t punish
you at Christmas. The moment you realize that the big man with the beard who was kissing mommy
under the mistletoe was actually your neighbour Chris, your behaviour will immediately change
because it was the belief there was an omniscient fat man always watching you that was causing you
to experience distress and behave according to that belief. While almost all of us completely drop the
belief and emotional relationship to Santa, many of us never drop the belief and emotional
relationship to another bearded man who lives in the sky and watches over us, but the deepest and

most visceral belief and emotional relationship that has be dropped is the belief in our self. Self-
realization is this phenomenon: the realization that who you think you are is not actually who you are.

It is not that you don’t exist, or like God, you can never quite be sure, it is the realization that you
cannot and never have been able to think about yourself.
The realization that entirely ends vanity is the same one that ends all forms of psychological
insecurity, which is the realization that it is not possible to compare yourself to someone else because
what you are comparing is not you. You are comparing your self-image with an image of someone
else, mistaking yourself for that image and feeling threatened by absolutely any corresponding belief
you have about that image. Not that your imagination isn’t real, it is a real sensory perception, but
you are mistaking your reflection for who you actually are, and then are concerned about the mirror
getting shattered.
While it varies person by person, generally speaking the realization that ends our self-image is

viscerally understanding that you can’t actually imagine yourself because you are yourself. Self-
knowledge is just knowledge. Self-image is just imagination. Self-doubt is just doubt. It is impossible

to “think about yourself” because you’re the one thinking. The false belief that we’ve had our whole
lives and never questioned is that who we are is our knowledge of ourselves. We believe, truly, that
who we are is literally who we think we are. If you think you are intelligent and someone says “yeah,
maybe for an idiot” you might get annoyed or upset. Why? Because someone is challenging who you
think you are. If you think you are attractive and you see someone that you think is more attractive
you might feel envious. In both instances we are responding to who we think we are and how

something else affects who we think we are. There has been no actual change in our intelligence or
attractiveness before or after our beliefs about ourselves were attacked.
The only way to rid yourself of a deeply held belief is not to be convinced that something else is
better, that is just changing your belief, and is what we do with our self-image our whole life. “Who I
think I am” changes your whole life through, and is why self-realization makes sense conceptually if
you are really ensconced in your own knowledge. You have always called yourself “me” but who you
think you are now is nothing like when you were 10, all of your beliefs about yourself have changed,
but yet you still say “yeah I’m me”. So what is it that you call “me”, that you’ve called yourself your
whole life, that has always been there?
The reason the question “who am I?” is so challenging, is because we conventionally do not know of a
way to tackle a problem other than thinking about an answer, then reconfirming the validity of that
answer through recognition. The most common answer to “who am I?” is simply listing a bunch of
characteristics that you identify with or describe your behaviour and interests, for example: “well, I’m
a male, I’m a central banker, I’m pretty old, I hope I’m not about to get fired, and I like jazz music and
raising interest rates”. This is obviously not who you are because these are just transitory
identifications. It is like describing the clothes you are wearing and saying they are you. In a year you
might not like raising interest rates anymore, and 30 years ago you weren’t half the stuff on the previous
list yet back then you would still say “I’m me”. To put it straightforwardly, you are not a central banker,
there are other central bankers, a central banker is an abstraction of you and your social identity, it is
your self-image. Another common but more nuanced answer to “who am I?” is “I am who I think I am”

or “I am a system of processes” or “I am consciousness”, but all of those are still a belief, a piece of self-
knowledge that causes you to say “is that me?” and as you hold the thought in your mind, unable to

slice it down any further, you say “yep, can’t break it down any further, that’s me”, and then hold onto
it as knowledge to re-use later as your best answer. You have taken your experience, abstracted your
experience with thought, and then recognized yourself in it. You have called your reflection yourself.
The reason this is not the answer is again, it is just a belief, your self-image, but also because I too
recognize that as a human being, I am a system of processes. So if you are a system of processes, and I
am a system of processes, we are the same in quality, yet we both know I see through my eyes, and you
see through your eyes, we do not have access to each other’s consciousness, so you have not addressed
the question “who am I?” you have attempted to objectify yourself with thought and label it as
knowledge. I am asking, who are you that is experiencing your consciousness that is separate from me,
who is experiencing my own consciousness? Again, you are absolutely, completely certain that you are
you, and I am absolutely, completely certain that I am me, who or what is that in its entirety?
To try to point to how our self-image is so deeply entangled with our self concept, if you sincerely
engage with self-enquiry and try to figure out “who am I?”, all you’ll find yourself doing is adding new
beliefs to yourself or modify existing ones: you will think things like “Am I nothing?” “Am I god?” “Are
we all one, physical thing?” “Am I love?” “Am I the soul?” “If I look at some boobs, am I the boobs?”
“wait is part of me going to like die or something?” “am I the universe experiencing itself?” “Am I just
my thoughts?” “Am I consciousness?” “Am I just memories?” “Think I better look at the boobs one
more time just in case” “wait, is it that there is no self in the first place?”, which are all just beliefs and
forms of knowledge, which are all wrong because they are again your self-image trying to come to a
conclusion of what you imagine yourself to be. You are frantically drawing pictures and saying “who’s
the artist? Who’s the artist?” “is this the artist?”, “what about this?”. The answer is that you are the

artist, the one doing the drawing, but we are not satisfied with that because that isn’t an image we
can recognize ourself in, and so our self-image says “yeah how do I draw that? What do I look like?”
but that isn’t you, that’s just what you look like. It is a symbol that tries to represent the thing, but it is
not the thing. You are the thing. You can’t imagine yourself. It is not possible. Absolutely every single
thing that you can possibly think of is by definition, not you. You are looking through your eyes right
now, you can’t see your own eyes you can only see out of your eyes. Thinking is the same, but we go
on drawing and drawing, thinking and thinking, worrying and worrying about ourselves our whole
lives through, not realizing what we are thinking about is not us.
This is why a great little teaching from this guy, J. Krishnamurti, was saying “the word is not the thing”.
And why one of the original means of trying to help people get to self-realization was through negation.
One version of that is if I were to ask as a riddle “who are you?” and you answered with “I’m a doctor”
I could say “So am I, so that can’t be you”. “I’m a human being”, “so am I so that can’t be you”, “I’m a
woman”, “So am I, so that can’t be you”. “Well I’m half African and half Caribbean”, “so am I, so that
can’t be you”, and at this point they’re probably thinking “damn, this guy is woke as hell”. But if you
get down to the essence of yourself, like a soul, or consciousness, or whatever your self-image thinks it
is, and realize there’s still not really anything you can overtly call yourself that I couldn’t also call myself.
Only when you realize the answer can’t be based on knowledge or belief does it start to open some
possibilities because you definitely are not me, but now you’re not sure what exactly you are.
To temporarily lighten things up a bit, because it’s such an obscure concept currently, if you go into
the wild world of the internet, a lot of discussion around psychedelics usually comes up around this
topic, so I think it’s worth mentioning that, first of all, obviously I’m not condoning drugs, but if you
ever accidentally fall onto a naked druid covered in psychedelic mushrooms mouth first at burning
man, after apologizing to who is presumably Elon musk’s girlfriend, you might experience a period
where you’re perfectly lucid and think “man, why was I so worried about my past and future and
what other people think of me, all I am is what I am now, that’s all I’ve ever been every step of the
way” or “I can’t believe I didn’t see it before, there aren’t problems, only circumstances, it’s me who
sees the problems in the circumstances”. This is likely a temporary ego-death and is a partial insight
into something permanent, but if you go all the way and experience this... then yeah that’s just the
drugs. I’ve heard occasionally that “psychedelics are the crash course, meditation is the phd”, and
while I get the point, this is ironically pretty snobbish in my opinion and a big misunderstanding of
meditation, because on psychedelics you start experiencing things like “oh man, why did I spend my
whole life looking at reality when I could have just looked through reality like this. How did I forget,
after all, this is how I made all this in the first place”. Then the next day you’ll be nibbling some burnt
toast thinking “well...maybe?”. In stark contrast, the PhD dissertation of meditation is after 10 years
of sitting with your legs crossed in the Himalayas, suddenly realizing “oh my god what am I doing”,
coming down from the mountains, moving to Florida, sitting on the beach with a margarita and saying
“ah yes, way warmer here”.
We all indirectly know who “me” is, because it is literally who you are, but it is nearly impossible to
pin down what it is exactly because absolutely every single thing we think we are gets in the way. The
problem isn’t that we are something else we don’t know yet, the problem is we indirectly know who

we are, but we also think we are an indefinite number of identifications that are not ourselves. Self-
realization is somewhat of a riddle, but it’s not a pointless riddle with no answer, it is the realization

that the solution to the riddle is that it’s not possible to answer the question in the format it presents

itself in, thereby causing the self-referential loop it had been stuck in to finally come to an end. The
riddle arises out of our self-knowledge desiring to know what it truly is, once and for all, with no
uncertainty, and the answer, which is discovering why it cannot know, causes self-knowledge to
realize itself to have no purpose, because what is the purpose of self-knowledge if not to know itself?
And so our self-knowledge comes to a complete and permanent conclusion automatically. This might
sound a bit frightening, but only because of our own misunderstanding. It is not never being able to
think about yourself again, it is realizing that what you were thinking about was never you. It’s like an
entire office of people trying to guess how many M&M’s are in a jar. Every single day each person gets
a guess and if they get it right, they can keep the M&M’s. Eventually, everyone has guessed every
possible number and people are starting to go insane about how no one has figured out how many
M&M’s there are yet. They start calling in PhD mathematicians, AI learning algorithms, and
professional M&M counters to try to figure out just how many goddamn M&M’s are in the fucking jar.
At this point, everyone has given up doing their actual job and every waking moment is spent trying to
figure out the number of God forsaken M&M’s. Mathematicians start hypothesizing there are
fractions of M&M’s, or an irrational number of M&M’s, or that there is an imaginary number of
quantum entangled M&M’s that are snapping into W&W’s when their partner is counted, and this
manic search for the answer to the mystery of the M&M jar continues for weeks until finally the boss,
who has returned from his vacation, waddles into the office and says “Hey guys, working hard or
hardly working am I right? oh, skittles! My favourite.” ... The realization of course being that it was
never about how many M&M’s were in the jar, it was about realizing you have no passion for your job
and this meaningless distraction was the most alive you’ve felt in years.
The greatest drama of the entire phenomenon of self-realization is not what comes to an end,
because what comes to end is who you think you are and your emotional relationship to your
imagination, not your ability to think. You don’t lose anything other than your own psychological
insecurity and the suffering that is caused by your beliefs. It’s like alt-tabbing and realizing you
accidentally launched the client twice and that’s why the game is lagging. It’s like the classic joke
where two cops are at a crime scene and one says to the other “Oh my god, I’ve never seen a
massacre like this. They’ve cut off his entire body, all that’s left is his cock.” It’s like going on a lifelong
journey to find the all-knowing AI singularity so you can ask it what the meaning of life is and finally
when you get there it says “ah geez, I’m just a robot. I don’t know the meaning of life. To be honest I
was hopin’, well I was I hopin’ I could ask you”. And you’re like “oh yeah, I am life, I forgot”.
A flower doesn’t need to read it’s Wikipedia page to live its life flawlessly, the Wikipedia page is an
abstraction of whatever the flower is, it isn’t the flower. The flower is perfect, the knowledge of the
flower is always imperfect. You are exactly the same way; you don’t need any knowledge of yourself
because you are yourself every single moment of your life. You only need knowledge to communicate
your experience to others because they aren’t you. The metaphor that is often used to explain this is
that the acorn is the oak tree, it doesn’t need to figure out how to do it. The acorn is not already the
oak tree like in determinism, which is a philosophical belief, it is the simple, plain English observation
that the acorn is the oak tree. It is physically impossible for the acorn to not be itself. You don’t plant
an acorn and get an apple tree, and if you do, you have to redefine acorns, not say that the acorn was
wrong, and your knowledge was right. You are yourself, and inherently cannot fuck up being yourself,
everything you do is yourself. There is no meaning of life because you are life. Life is a fact; it isn’t a
meaning. You are asking life itself, you, what its meaning is, which is just the question “what do I

do?”, it isn’t anything profound, it is confused. In the same way we define an orangutan by what an
orangutan does, not by what we have decided an orangutan should do. If you were an orangutan who
ate bananas and looked like a coconut, we’d call you a textbook orangutan. If you were an orangutan
who said “you know what, I want to fix cars and wear a red tracksuit” then we’d call you chief Ferrari
strategist. Whatever you do you’re still an orangutan.

The point of asking the question “who am I?” is in order to figure it out, you have to see that all self-
knowledge is completely useless because self-knowledge is itself the error. Anything and everything

that it thinks you are is wrong. When your brain finally figures out who you are, exactly, all the time,
self-knowledge completely concludes because the problem is solved, and it realizes itself to not have
function. The moment your brain, which is you, realizes exactly how knowledge and thinking is
limited, it automatically never tries to use it ever again for what it’s not useful for, which is why
psychological suffering stops arising, because all insecurity is caused by what we think and believe
about ourselves. To give a bit of an analogy for the phenomenon, imagine you had a medieval village
where everyone was wielding their knowledge like swords, the youngins would be holding their
wooden swords clumsily and haphazardly, the average person in a mediocre way, and the great
philosophers and academics with perfect poise and precision, or at least they would convince you
that’s what they were doing. That is knowledge, and it is very useful for academia, science,
technology, and creativity, because they are all things that are outside of you that you interact with. It
is useless for self-understanding. Self-realization is not how well you wield your sword, you could be
horrible at it, it is the lightbulb realization that causes your sword to automatically be sheathed when
there is not any combat, and that realization is completely unrelated to being a great swordsman. You
could be a moron with a sheath or a genius with a sheath, it makes no difference if the sword is put
away. If there’s a fight, yeah it doesn’t matter how Zen you are where’s Oppenheimer and Jocko
Willink?
In my opinion, one of the biggest hints to help you solve the question of “Who am I?” is to address
your relationship with sensory perception. We all know that part of us is that we can see, we can
hear, we can touch, we can taste, etc, and as well, we can think. Now imagine someone who has
always been blind says “what is seeing like?” I want you to tell me so I can think about it. Imagine
someone who has always been deaf says “I want to know what hearing is like, I want you to tell me so
I can think about it. By tell me I mean like, write it down” You might sit there for a second trying to
come up with how to communicate it, but the reality is that its impossible. It is not possible to
imagine what seeing is like if you have never seen anything. It is not possible to imagine what hearing
is like if you have never heard anything. The reason why is that thinking is entirely composed of
something that we have perceived in the past. Thinking is our human intelligence modulating our
memories, and memories are some form of past sensory perception. What must be seen is that
thinking is one of our sensory perceptions, and is itself is entirely composed of memory, which is the
stored recording of our other sensory perceptions. Then, if thinking is a sensory perception, and is
composed of the memory of sensory perceptions, and if seeing, hearing, touching, and everything else
we experience is a form of sensory perception, that means all that you have ever experienced in your
life or will ever experience is sensory perception. The only thing that exists to you is sensory
perception.
The next question is, what is a sensory perception? And if you test it right now, you will see that you
can look around, then you can touch the table, then you can listen to the words I am saying, then you

can think about what you’re going to eat for dinner, then you can go back to looking at the video. A
sensory perception is whatever you are currently aware of, and that is what we call consciousness.
This comes with an extremely, extremely important characteristic, and is the crux of the entire
phenomenon, which is seeing that all sensory perception, including thinking, and everything that
exists within our conscious experience, occurs in the moment of time that we call “now”. You are
absolutely incapable of experiencing the past or the future. There is absolutely nothing you have or
ever will experience outside of what is occurring to you “now”. Our self-image says “no, I can
remember the past and think of the future” but that is just thinking and is a sensory perception
occurring to now that has been misunderstood.
I think a good way to visualize this is to imagine a tv screen. There is nothing being projected onto the
tv screen like with film, the screen receives a signal, and it modulates itself to form an image. What
dictates what appears on the tv is whatever signal it is currently receiving. No matter what the tv is
displaying, you would never say “oh, it’s playing the signal from yesterday” or “that’s a future signal
that’s going to happen” you know that if the tv is showing it, it is exactly the signal it is receiving now.
You, from birth to death, are exactly the same way. The problem is that one of the channels on our tv
does not believe this. The seeing channel knows it’s a signal that occurs now, the hearing channel
knows, the tasting channel knows, every channel knows it only occurs right now except one channel,
which is thinking. The thinking channel says “yes, yes, of course thinking occurs now, but the things I
think about can be in the past or the future. For example, right now I am thinking of a nice mountain I
displayed last week. I can’t remember it that well, but it looked kinda like this” what the tv is doing is
receiving a signal now and is displaying that image now, then saying “this image is the past” which it
isn’t. It is an image that the tv is creating right now, that it then mistakenly calls the past because it
reminds it of another signal it received in a previous “now”. What the thinking channel on the tv
doesn’t realize is what it thinks it is doing is not actually what it is doing. We all know that a tv only
displays exactly the signal it is currently receiving, meaning the screen is not contemplating the past,
the screen is contemplating a signal that exists in the present. Where this relates to self-realization is
if we imagine if the screen was very confused and says, “I’m trying to figure out what I am”, the way
the thinking channel would try to figure that out is by cycling different images on the screen and
trying to deduce if those images were itself, because that is literally the only thing a screen can do.
After cycling through it’s favourite images and movies, the screen says “no, these are just things I like,
these aren’t who I am” so then it starts trying to deduce itself down logically and finally says “well, I’m
pretty sure this is me” and then displays an image of a tv screen that approximates the tv itself, and a
list of hardware specifications that it has concluded it thinks it has. This is analogous to our self-image.
The tv screen is displaying an image of a tv screen and says, “this is me, this is who I am”. But that is
not what the tv screen is, that is literally just an image of a tv screen that the tv screen is displaying.
Because the screen can’t figure out how it could do any better, it spends the rest of its tv life
improving and refining its self-understanding to more accurately display an image of who it thinks it
is. The reality is that the screen has invented a problem for itself that does not exist. It has created its
own self-image, which is a Koan. It cannot ever be correct. It is trying to display an image of itself it is
then going to look at and say, “that is me”. The reality is that it is not possible for the screen to ever
complete this task successfully because “who it is” is the signal it is displaying, not the objects that
appear in that signal. In the same way the modulation of the screen is synonymous with the signal it is
currently displaying, that is the same with you. What you call “me” is whatever sensory perception
you are consciously experiencing right now, which includes thinking. You cannot think about yourself

in the same way a screen cannot display itself because it itself is the display. You cannot think about
yourself because what you are thinking about is not you, you’re the one that is aware of the thought.
Your fundamental and only identity is the sensory perception that you are currently aware of.
I AM seeing.
I AM hearing.
I AM feeling.
I AM thinking.
Etc.
Which is so primordial it is the basis of our language itself and all that exists for us. Everything else we
mistakenly think we are, which is our self-image, is a derivative of thinking, which is still a subset of
sensory perception that occurs to you now.
If this is itself a genuine realization, like twanging a door stop, that all sensory perception happens
now, thinking is composed of the memory of sensory perceptions, and is itself a sensory perception,
and therefore is also only composed of what has once occurred to you as “now”, what this means is
that you, the awareness of sensory perceptions, is just like the screen, and you do not experience the
past or the future, they do not exist to you at all, they are misunderstandings of the signal you are
processing now. You have never in your life experienced anything other than what is occurring to you
now. It’s not “yeah, yeah, I should really live in the present” it’s that no, you don’t have a choice.
Everything you have ever called the past or the future is a misunderstanding of what “now” is. Ten
years ago, you were “me, now”, today you are “me, now” and in ten years you will be “me, now”. You
remember going to the store yesterday, and tomorrow you say you will go to the gym, but those are
both thoughts that occurs in the present. Subjectively, you have never experienced the past or the
future. You have always been the same thing, which is the awareness of what you are currently
perceiving.
Our deep, deep confusion is not realizing that “my past” and “my future” are the belief that our life
stretches out over 80 odd years like a long horizontal line, but the entirety of everything we have or
will ever experience happens to us in the present, meaning who we are is a vertical line that
modulates in characteristics, with absolutely no exceptions, just like the tv screen receiving a signal,
and we call our present memory of previous states the past and the present imagination of potential
states the future, yet both of those things occur to us as thinking in the present. The invention of our
self-image is the belief that if we take this modulating screen, which is us, we can then say, “I’m going
to think about how this modulating screen used to be in the past or will be in the future or how it
probably looks from a different angle”. We think this is a good idea because it will help us act and
prepare for what might happen to us. That is not the error, that is just thinking, the error is that we
believe that this illustration is what’s happening. We think we are legitimately imagining things that
have or might happen to the screen and what it is now, but what is actually happening is an incorrect
understanding of the limitation of thinking, because you can’t go outside the screen, the screen is all
you are, everything has to happen on the screen. When you contemplate past and future modulations
of the screen, that itself is part of the screen modulating, it isn’t outside of it. Psychological suffering

and insecurity is fundamentally caused by a recursion of our sensory perception within our sensory
perception. We react emotionally and psychologically to both the overarching structure, the screen,
and also to our thoughts and imagination of ourselves that has invented this substructure, which is
just part of the screen, but we think it is the past or future of the whole screen. The screen is

consciousness, which is whatever signal it is currently aware of, and this sub structure is your self-
image. We think both of these structures are us because the substructure is believed to be an

abstraction of the superstructure, but it isn’t, it’s just a piece of the superstructure we think is
something outside of it. As it currently stands you think you are one human being, but there are two
things that you call yourself: Your conscious awareness and your self-knowledge. The belief that you
are a self-aware being exists in your self-knowledge and your self-knowledge exists in your conscious
awareness when you think about yourself, which creates the recursion. The issue is that these are not
one thing, these are two things, and you are not two things. Self-realization is seeing in yourself that
self-knowledge has absolutely no function at all because it is literally impossible for it to accomplish
what it’s made for. This recursion comes to an end when you realize that what you believe you are
doing, which is thinking about and imagining yourself, has never been what you were actually doing
because that isn’t possible. This is why self-realization is sometimes called “stepping back” or the
metaphor of watching the hurricane instead of being trapped inside of it are used. That sounds
grandiose, but it really just means that the screen realizes it isn’t the images on the screen, it is the
modulation of itself that creates the images. This ends the screens belief that the images on the
screen were itself, so the panic of displaying a volcano on its screen and thinking “oh my god this is
bad is something wrong with me?” doesn’t arise.
I think a good way to point to our misunderstanding of our relationship with time is to imagine there’s
an alien who wants to experience what it’s like to be a human. The alien takes you and plugs some
wires into your brain and says, I’m going to take over your consciousness for a second to download
your memory. Ok close your eyes, and in 10 seconds I’m going to take over. Ok 3 2 1 I’m opening my
eyes as a human for the first time. Huh, weird. feet huh?” and they swap back having downloaded the
data and the alien says thanks, I understand you now. You might say “what, that’s it? How can you
know what it’s like to be me, I had to go through years of self-improvement to get where I am now. I
was bullied in school and had two terrible relationships before figuring out who I am now” “yeah I
know it was in your memory” “what no, it took like half my life to go through that” “yeah dude I was
literally you I know” “no but you can’t know what it was like you didn’t experience it you just sat
there, what does it feel like for someone to break up with you?” “Feels bad man” “what, but it didn’t
happen to you” “bro, I was literally you. I knew exactly what you know now. It’s in your memories”
“what, but. You didn’t... you weren’t there”.
We create a false continuity in our life and believe that there is an element of chronological time in
our subjective experience, and the only way to navigate that world is to invent an abstraction of
ourselves that can exist there in our thoughts. But what we call “my past” exists in the present as
memory, what we call “my future” exists in the present as imagination. There has never been a single
moment in your life nor will there ever be as a human where you have experienced anything other
than “me, now”. What we call our past or future is a misunderstanding of what we are now.
Ultimately, self-realization is the physiological conclusion of all beliefs about yourself because they
are unnecessary and causing harm to you. You don’t need any beliefs about yourself, you are always
yourself in your entirety every moment of your life. The realization there is only ever one thing that is

ever occurring in conscious experience, and who you are is your awareness of whatever that is, means
there is nothing else you ever have to be concerned about. The point of meditation is to realize this,
but the realization itself is “oh, what on earth am I doing. I’m always meditating and always have
been. It’s impossible not to be meditating.”
If narcissism is “I just said what I think, you’re the one who got upset”, normal mental health is “I
always do my best but often doubt myself”, depression is “my opinion doesn’t matter”, nihilism is
“nothing matters”, existentialism is “life is what you make it”, materialism is “it is all the
mathematical unfolding of time, space, and matter”, stoicism is “I can deal with whatever happens”,
pragmatism is “whatever works!”, realism is “that seems optimistic” simulation theory is “it’s all a
virtual reality”, solipsism is “It’s only me anyway”, religion is “god acts through me”, spiritualism is “I
am consciousness experiencing god”, and determinism is “my life is destiny”, then self-realization is
making sure everyone in the restaurant is enjoying their Wendy’s value meal. In earnest summary,
self-realization is a physiological phenomenon triggered by an insight into the nature of what you are
that causes the permanent cessation of emotional relationship to the imagination of yourself. That is
all that is and all that it ever has been.
I wanted to end with one last tidbit to relate to this which is what is called ‘non-duality’. Non-duality
is not actually a concept, it is like if self-realization were heads, non-duality is tails. It sounds pretty
esoteric, but all that it addresses is that we conventionally believe that our lives have two
components: there’s me, and then there’s the world, and I’m a person who experiences the world.
Non duality is essentially pointing out that it is our beliefs that create that division, and that both are
misunderstandings of the same thing. This often gets massively misunderstood by spiritualists,
theologians, or psychonauts as “we’re all one” or “it’s all god”, or “you are the universe experiencing
itself”. It’s not that those phrases are necessarily wrong depending on how you interpret them, it’s
that the beliefs of the people who say those things have got it backwards in their own minds. Imagine
our lives like this: There is a flower, which is the object, a camera, which is the subject, and the
photograph, which is the signal generated between the two. We conventionally believe who we are is
the subject, which is our brain and body, and we believe we are the photograph, which is our
consciousness, which we think of as a derivative of our brain and body. Then there are objects outside
of us that we call “the universe” or “physical reality” that we do not think are us, but we can
experience and interact with them. Non-duality is usually just referring to subject and object, but I
think it’s more understandable if you expand it to three by calling the signal a third thing. So when
people visit the machine elves with Joe Rogan and Terrance McKenna, then tell you “we’re all one
bro”, what they are referring to is an experience they had of how these three different things
appeared to merge into one thing, and even though it is not what they are currently experiencing,
they believe it to be the case that these three things that appear to them as different are actually one
thing because they experienced it before. Similarly, “you are the universe experiencing itself” is
typically the belief that the universe is one big super organism, and the big bang was effectively the
seed, and it has now grown into what it is today, and you are like leaves on the tree that is the entire
cosmos, meaning you are part of the whole. Life didn’t begin 4 billion years ago, life began at the big
bang, because that’s what the universe is. Even though it’s an attractive narrative, it is ultimately still
just a belief, and with this logic you then say, I am not just the camera and photograph, I am also
flower. I am all three things. Neither of these things are self-realization or non-duality. One is an
emotional and perceptual experience that you then remember and form beliefs around, and one is

belief in a story of what the universe is doing and how you relate to it. Non-duality is not the belief
that three different things are actually one thing, it is pointing out there isn’t actually three different
things in the first place. When you look at a cloud that is raining onto the ocean, it appears that there
are three different things there, but there isn’t, there’s only three forms of the same thing.
To use another video game analogy, when you are playing Super Mario, you know you are playing a
video game, and even though you are playing as Mario, you know he is just part of the video game,
you aren’t actually him, even though you are controlling him. You really know deep down that really
what you’re doing is just interacting with the video game. Now imagine instead of playing as Mario,
you were Mario. Suddenly you are living in a strange world filled with mushrooms, gold coins, and a
giant spiky turtle that your crush seems to spend a lot more time with than you. You would be very
confused and try to figure out what the hell is going on and what you should do. Non duality, as an
actual realization, not as religious teachings or dogma, is realizing that what you perceive as the
subject, which is me - Mario, and object - the game world, is a false separation created by your beliefs.
Non-duality isn’t Mario realizing he is in a video game, he doesn’t have access to that information,
non-duality is Mario realizing that he and his world are both the same thing, he is not in the video
game playing it, he is the video game. Our reality as human beings is the same, not that you’re in a
video game, but that you aren’t separate from physical reality. There is no meaning of life because
you are life. Life is a fact, not a meaning. It is the false separation we create by believing we are a
person in the world who then acts that creates a separation between us and what is perceived as
outside of us, when really it is two forms of the same thing. From your perspective on the couch, there
is no difference between Mario and Bowser, they are both part of the video game, you just get to play
as Mario. Mario realizing he isn’t in a video game playing it, he is the video game, is self-realization,
because it necessitates realizing his fundamental identity is not Mario the video game character, his
identity has always been his awareness of what Mario the video game character is experiencing,
which is entirely a product of the video game, which is exactly what you automatically know if you are
an outsider playing as Mario with your controller. It is just extremely, extremely hard to realize when
you’re Mario inside the game because it requires breaking down your existing beliefs, not changing or
adding to them.
While I think it’s not too hard to intellectually understand that concept, it is another thing to realize it
yourself because what I’ve given you so far is an idea. You can then take the idea, think about it, and
then agree or disagree with it, which means ultimately you are just adding it or not adding it to

yourself as another belief, meaning nothing has changed at all. The concept I described is not self-
realization, the conclusion of your self-image is. For the phenomenon to actually occur, you have to

leave behind the analogies in order to actually drill into your own psychological experience and realize
it not to be an idea, but actually, truly, what you already experience but did not realize, and that
means actually engaging in self-enquiry.
